plans/express_to_next.js_migration_9d815df8.plan.md, before:

---
name: Express to Next.js Migration
overview: Migrate all Express router functionality to Next.js API routes, consolidating into a single Next.js server. Replace SuperSave auto-generated routes with custom repository-based queries.
todos:
  - id: phase1-nextjs-config
    content: Configure Next.js for standalone mode and add route rewrites
    status: completed
  - id: phase1-di
    content: Consolidate dependency injection to register all repositories in management
    status: pending
  - id: phase1-middleware
    content: Create Next.js-compatible middleware utilities (API key, tenant, auth)
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-health
    content: Create health check API routes
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-config
    content: Migrate configuration API routes
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-apikeys
    content: Migrate API keys creation route
    status: pending
  - id: phase3-collections
    content: Create custom collection API routes with repository queries
    status: pending
  - id: phase3-query-helpers
    content: Implement query helper utilities for tenant/user filtering
    status: pending
  - id: phase4-chat
    content: Migrate chat completions with SSE streaming support
    status: pending
  - id: phase4-models
    content: Migrate models endpoint
    status: pending
  - id: phase5-weave
    content: Migrate weave proxy with catch-all route and all HTTP methods
    status: pending
  - id: phase6-telemetry
    content: Migrate telemetry forwarding route
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-dockerfile
    content: Update Dockerfile for Next.js standalone deployment
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-cleanup
    content: Remove Express dependencies and clean up router package
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-server-api
    content: Refactor server-api.ts to use direct repository calls
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-tests
    content: Update integration and E2E tests
    status: pending
---

# Express to Next.js Migration Plan

## Current Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph current [Current Architecture]
        Express[Express Server<br/>packages/router]
        NextJS[Next.js App<br/>packages/management]
        Express -->|embeds via initializeUI| NextJS

        subgraph expressRoutes [Express Routes]
            Chat["/api/v1/.../chat/completions"]
            Weave["/weave/..."]
            Collections["/api/v1/collections/*"]
            Config["/api/v1/configuration/*"]
            ApiKeys["/api/v1/api-keys"]
            Telemetry["/api/v1/tm/api/send"]
            Health["/_health"]
        end
    end
```

## Target Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph target [Target Architecture]
        NextJSOnly[Next.js Standalone Server<br/>packages/management]

        subgraph apiRoutes [Next.js API Routes]
            ChatNext["/api/v1/.../chat/completions"]
            WeaveNext["/weave/..."]
            CollectionsNext["/api/v1/collections/*<br/>Custom repository queries"]
            ConfigNext["/api/v1/configuration/*"]
            ApiKeysNext["/api/v1/api-keys"]
            TelemetryNext["/api/v1/tm/api/send"]
            HealthNext["/health"]
        end
    end
```

## Key Files to Reference

- Express server entry: [`packages/router/src/server.ts`](packages/router/src/server.ts)
- DI initialization: [`packages/router/src/core/dependency-injection/initialize.ts`](packages/router/src/core/dependency-injection/initialize.ts)
- Management DI: [`packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts)
- Chat completion handler: [`packages/router/src/modules/chat-completions/routes/chat-completion.ts`](packages/router/src/modules/chat-completions/routes/chat-completion.ts)
- Weave handler: [`packages/router/src/modules/weave/routes/process-request.ts`](packages/router/src/modules/weave/routes/process-request.ts)

---

## Phase 1: Infrastructure Setup

### 1.1 Update Next.js Configuration ✅

- Configure [`packages/management/next.config.ts`](packages/management/next.config.ts) for standalone output mode
- ~~Add necessary rewrites for route compatibility~~

> **Completed:** Added `output: "standalone"` to enable self-contained builds for Docker deployment.
>
> **Deviation from plan:** Rewrites were removed entirely instead of being added. The original rewrites forwarded requests to Express during development, but since Express is being fully replaced, they are no longer needed. All routes will be handled directly by Next.js API routes.

### 1.2 Consolidate Dependency Injection

- Extend [`packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts) to register all repositories currently initialized in the router package
- Move relevant services from `packages/router/src/modules/` to shared packages or management

### 1.3 Create Shared Middleware Utilities

- Create Next.js-compatible middleware for:
- API key validation (from `check-api-key.ts`)
- Tenant resolution (from `get-tenant.ts`)
- Request ID generation (from `unique-id-middleware.ts`)
- Authentication checks (from `check-api-key-or-user.ts`)

---

## Phase 2: Core API Routes Migration

### 2.1 Health Check

- Create `/app/health/route.ts` and `/_health/route.ts`

### 2.2 Configuration Routes

- `/app/api/v1/configuration/route.ts` - GET configuration
- `/app/api/v1/configuration/server/route.ts` - GET/POST server config

### 2.3 API Keys Route

- `/app/api/v1/api-keys/route.ts` - POST create API key

---

## Phase 3: Collections API (Custom Repository Queries)

Replace SuperSave auto-generated routes with explicit API routes using repository pattern:

### 3.1 Create Collection Route Handlers

For each collection (providers, deployments, api-keys, tenants, flows, etc.):

```javascript
/app/api/v1/collections/[collection]/route.ts      - GET (list), POST (create)
/app/api/v1/collections/[collection]/[id]/route.ts - GET, PUT, DELETE
```

### 3.2 Implement Query Helpers

Create query builder utilities in `packages/management/src/lib/api/query-helpers.ts`:

```typescript
export const addTenantIdToQuery = (query: Query, tenantId: string) => {
  return query.eq("tenantId", tenantId);
};
```

### 3.3 Collection Types to Support

- `providers` - LLM/Weave provider configurations
- `deployments` - Deployment configurations
- `api-keys` - API key records
- `tenants` - Tenant records (if multi-tenant)
- `llm-flows` - LLM flow configurations
- `weave-flows` - Weave flow configurations
- `stored-configuration` - Server configuration storage

---

## Phase 4: LLM Chat Completions Migration

### 4.1 Create Dynamic Route Structure

```javascript
/app/api/v1/[deploymentSlug]/chat/completions/route.ts
/app/api/v1/[deploymentSlug]/models/route.ts
```

(Or with tenant path if multi-tenant: `/app/api/v1/[tenantPath]/[deploymentSlug]/...`)

### 4.2 Migrate Chat Completion Handler

- Move `ChatCompletionHandler` logic to Next.js route handler
- Implement SSE streaming using Next.js `ReadableStream` response
- Port LLM provider proxies (OpenAI, Google, Static)

### 4.3 Migrate Models Endpoint

- Port `ModelsHandler` to Next.js route

---

## Phase 5: Weave Proxy Migration

### 5.1 Create Catch-All Route

```javascript
/app/weave/[deploymentSlug]/[[...path]]/route.ts
```

(With tenant support if needed)

### 5.2 Implement All HTTP Methods

- Export handlers for GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH, OPTIONS, HEAD
- Port `ProcessRequest` handler logic
- Maintain request/response header forwarding

---

## Phase 6: Telemetry Migration

### 6.1 Create Telemetry Route

- `/app/api/v1/tm/api/send/route.ts`
- Port telemetry forwarding logic

---

## Phase 7: Cleanup & Finalization

### 7.1 Update Dockerfile

- Remove router package deployment
- Build and run only the management package
- Update CMD to use `next start`

### 7.2 Remove Express Dependencies

- Remove `@auth/express` from router
- Clean up unused Express-specific code
- Consider removing or archiving `packages/router`

### 7.3 Update Server-Side API Calls

- Refactor [`packages/management/src/lib/api/server-api.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/api/server-api.ts) to call repositories directly instead of HTTP fetch

### 7.4 Update Tests

- Migrate integration tests to work with Next.js
- Update Playwright tests if needed

### 7.5 Update Documentation

- Update installation docs
- Update Docker Compose configuration

---

## Migration Order (Recommended)

1. Infrastructure (Phase 1) - Foundation for everything else
2. Health check (Phase 2.1) - Simple, validates setup
3. Configuration routes (Phase 2.2-2.3) - Management UI depends on these
4. Collections API (Phase 3) - Core CRUD operations
5. Chat completions (Phase 4) - Core LLM functionality
6. Weave proxy (Phase 5) - HTTP proxy functionality
7. Telemetry (Phase 6) - Analytics
8. Cleanup (Phase 7) - Remove old code

---

## Risk Considerations

- **Streaming responses**: Next.js handles SSE differently than Express; requires `ReadableStream` approach
- **Catch-all routes**: Weave proxy needs careful path handling with Next.js dynamic routes

Commit message:

chore: update Next.js version and consolidate dependency injection in get-container.ts
- Upgraded Next.js from 15.3.4 to 15.4.10.
- Extended get-container.ts to register additional repositories

plans/express_to_next.js_migration_9d815df8.plan.md, after:

---
name: Express to Next.js Migration
overview: Migrate all Express router functionality to Next.js API routes, consolidating into a single Next.js server. Replace SuperSave auto-generated routes with custom repository-based queries.
todos:
  - id: phase1-nextjs-config
    content: Configure Next.js for standalone mode and add route rewrites
    status: completed
  - id: phase1-di
    content: Consolidate dependency injection to register all repositories in management
    status: completed
  - id: phase1-middleware
    content: Create Next.js-compatible middleware utilities (API key, tenant, auth)
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-health
    content: Create health check API routes
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-config
    content: Migrate configuration API routes
    status: pending
  - id: phase2-apikeys
    content: Migrate API keys creation route
    status: pending
  - id: phase3-collections
    content: Create custom collection API routes with repository queries
    status: pending
  - id: phase3-query-helpers
    content: Implement query helper utilities for tenant/user filtering
    status: pending
  - id: phase4-chat
    content: Migrate chat completions with SSE streaming support
    status: pending
  - id: phase4-models
    content: Migrate models endpoint
    status: pending
  - id: phase5-weave
    content: Migrate weave proxy with catch-all route and all HTTP methods
    status: pending
  - id: phase6-telemetry
    content: Migrate telemetry forwarding route
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-dockerfile
    content: Update Dockerfile for Next.js standalone deployment
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-cleanup
    content: Remove Express dependencies and clean up router package
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-server-api
    content: Refactor server-api.ts to use direct repository calls
    status: pending
  - id: phase7-tests
    content: Update integration and E2E tests
    status: pending
---

# Express to Next.js Migration Plan

## Current Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph current [Current Architecture]
        Express[Express Server<br/>packages/router]
        NextJS[Next.js App<br/>packages/management]
        Express -->|embeds via initializeUI| NextJS

        subgraph expressRoutes [Express Routes]
            Chat["/api/v1/.../chat/completions"]
            Weave["/weave/..."]
            Collections["/api/v1/collections/*"]
            Config["/api/v1/configuration/*"]
            ApiKeys["/api/v1/api-keys"]
            Telemetry["/api/v1/tm/api/send"]
            Health["/_health"]
        end
    end
```

## Target Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph target [Target Architecture]
        NextJSOnly[Next.js Standalone Server<br/>packages/management]

        subgraph apiRoutes [Next.js API Routes]
            ChatNext["/api/v1/.../chat/completions"]
            WeaveNext["/weave/..."]
            CollectionsNext["/api/v1/collections/*<br/>Custom repository queries"]
            ConfigNext["/api/v1/configuration/*"]
            ApiKeysNext["/api/v1/api-keys"]
            TelemetryNext["/api/v1/tm/api/send"]
            HealthNext["/health"]
        end
    end
```

## Key Files to Reference

- Express server entry: [`packages/router/src/server.ts`](packages/router/src/server.ts)
- DI initialization: [`packages/router/src/core/dependency-injection/initialize.ts`](packages/router/src/core/dependency-injection/initialize.ts)
- Management DI: [`packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts)
- Chat completion handler: [`packages/router/src/modules/chat-completions/routes/chat-completion.ts`](packages/router/src/modules/chat-completions/routes/chat-completion.ts)
- Weave handler: [`packages/router/src/modules/weave/routes/process-request.ts`](packages/router/src/modules/weave/routes/process-request.ts)

---

## Phase 1: Infrastructure Setup

### 1.1 Update Next.js Configuration ✅

- Configure [`packages/management/next.config.ts`](packages/management/next.config.ts) for standalone output mode
- ~~Add necessary rewrites for route compatibility~~

> **Completed:** Added `output: "standalone"` to enable self-contained builds for Docker deployment.
>
> **Deviation from plan:** Rewrites were removed entirely instead of being added. The original rewrites forwarded requests to Express during development, but since Express is being fully replaced, they are no longer needed. All routes will be handled directly by Next.js API routes.

### 1.2 Consolidate Dependency Injection ✅

- Extend [`packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/core/get-container.ts) to register all repositories currently initialized in the router package
- Move relevant services from `packages/router/src/modules/` to shared packages or management

> **Completed:** Extended `get-container.ts` to register all 8 repositories:
>
> - `PROVIDER_REPOSITORY`
> - `DEPLOYMENT_REPOSITORY`
> - `API_KEY_REPOSITORY`
> - `TENANT_REPOSITORY`
> - `NEXT_AUTH_USER_REPOSITORY`
> - `WEAVE_FLOW_REPOSITORY`
> - `LLM_FLOW_REPOSITORY`
> - `STORED_CONFIGURATION_REPOSITORY`
>
> **Note:** Moving services from router to shared packages will be done as needed during route migration phases.

### 1.3 Create Shared Middleware Utilities

- Create Next.js-compatible middleware for:
- API key validation (from `check-api-key.ts`)
- Tenant resolution (from `get-tenant.ts`)
- Request ID generation (from `unique-id-middleware.ts`)
- Authentication checks (from `check-api-key-or-user.ts`)

---

## Phase 2: Core API Routes Migration

### 2.1 Health Check

- Create `/app/health/route.ts` and `/_health/route.ts`

### 2.2 Configuration Routes

- `/app/api/v1/configuration/route.ts` - GET configuration
- `/app/api/v1/configuration/server/route.ts` - GET/POST server config

### 2.3 API Keys Route

- `/app/api/v1/api-keys/route.ts` - POST create API key

---

## Phase 3: Collections API (Custom Repository Queries)

Replace SuperSave auto-generated routes with explicit API routes using repository pattern:

### 3.1 Create Collection Route Handlers

For each collection (providers, deployments, api-keys, tenants, flows, etc.):

```javascript
/app/api/v1/collections/[collection]/route.ts      - GET (list), POST (create)
/app/api/v1/collections/[collection]/[id]/route.ts - GET, PUT, DELETE
```

### 3.2 Implement Query Helpers

Create query builder utilities in `packages/management/src/lib/api/query-helpers.ts`:

```typescript
export const addTenantIdToQuery = (query: Query, tenantId: string) => {
  return query.eq("tenantId", tenantId);
};
```

### 3.3 Collection Types to Support

- `providers` - LLM/Weave provider configurations
- `deployments` - Deployment configurations
- `api-keys` - API key records
- `tenants` - Tenant records (if multi-tenant)
- `llm-flows` - LLM flow configurations
- `weave-flows` - Weave flow configurations
- `stored-configuration` - Server configuration storage

---

## Phase 4: LLM Chat Completions Migration

### 4.1 Create Dynamic Route Structure

```javascript
/app/api/v1/[deploymentSlug]/chat/completions/route.ts
/app/api/v1/[deploymentSlug]/models/route.ts
```

(Or with tenant path if multi-tenant: `/app/api/v1/[tenantPath]/[deploymentSlug]/...`)

### 4.2 Migrate Chat Completion Handler

- Move `ChatCompletionHandler` logic to Next.js route handler
- Implement SSE streaming using Next.js `ReadableStream` response
- Port LLM provider proxies (OpenAI, Google, Static)

### 4.3 Migrate Models Endpoint

- Port `ModelsHandler` to Next.js route

---

## Phase 5: Weave Proxy Migration

### 5.1 Create Catch-All Route

```javascript
/app/weave/[deploymentSlug]/[[...path]]/route.ts
```

(With tenant support if needed)

### 5.2 Implement All HTTP Methods

- Export handlers for GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH, OPTIONS, HEAD
- Port `ProcessRequest` handler logic
- Maintain request/response header forwarding

---

## Phase 6: Telemetry Migration

### 6.1 Create Telemetry Route

- `/app/api/v1/tm/api/send/route.ts`
- Port telemetry forwarding logic

---

## Phase 7: Cleanup & Finalization

### 7.1 Update Dockerfile

- Remove router package deployment
- Build and run only the management package
- Update CMD to use `next start`

### 7.2 Remove Express Dependencies

- Remove `@auth/express` from router
- Clean up unused Express-specific code
- Consider removing or archiving `packages/router`

### 7.3 Update Server-Side API Calls

- Refactor [`packages/management/src/lib/api/server-api.ts`](packages/management/src/lib/api/server-api.ts) to call repositories directly instead of HTTP fetch

### 7.4 Update Tests

- Migrate integration tests to work with Next.js
- Update Playwright tests if needed

### 7.5 Update Documentation

- Update installation docs
- Update Docker Compose configuration

---

## Migration Order (Recommended)

1. Infrastructure (Phase 1) - Foundation for everything else
2. Health check (Phase 2.1) - Simple, validates setup
3. Configuration routes (Phase 2.2-2.3) - Management UI depends on these
4. Collections API (Phase 3) - Core CRUD operations
5. Chat completions (Phase 4) - Core LLM functionality
6. Weave proxy (Phase 5) - HTTP proxy functionality
7. Telemetry (Phase 6) - Analytics
8. Cleanup (Phase 7) - Remove old code

---

## Risk Considerations

- **Streaming responses**: Next.js handles SSE differently than Express; requires `ReadableStream` approach
- **Catch-all routes**: Weave proxy needs careful path handling with Next.js dynamic routes
